---
title: 'A simple guide to running GATK'
date: 2020-07-20
permalink: /posts/2020/07/gatk/
# table of contents
toc: true
toc_label: "Contents"
toc_icon: "dna"
toc_sticky: true
---

Motivation
---

There are probably hundreds of "how to use GATK" guides published online, not including the detailed documentation on the [GATK website](https://gatk.broadinstitute.org/hc/en-us).
But in my (admittedly limited) experience, running GATK can be a bit finicky, and the workflow for producing a VCF using GATK "best practices" isn't obvious.
Below I've outlined my own simple workflow for calling SNVs using GATK, including the various preprocessing steps and file/software downloads.
This is mostly for my own reference in the future, when the ramblings in my lab notebook eventually lose all meaning to me.

Installing GATK
---

Getting a compiled GATK binary is actually *quite easy*. Simply go to the [releases](https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/releases) on the GATK GitHub, and `wget` the most recent version (in my case, v.4.1.8.1). Then, just unzip the package.

```
wget https://github.com/broadinstitute/gatk/releases/download/4.1.8.1/gatk-4.1.8.1.zip

unzip gatk-4.1.8.1.zip
```

The `gatk` binary should be sitting in that directory. Just run as follows:

```
/path/to/gatk/binary/gatk
```

Preparing BAM files for initial variant calling
---

Let's assume you're running GATK separately on individual sample BAMs. Even though each BAM contains a single sample's reads, it's still **necessary to add read groups to the BAM header and read entries**. 

```
samtools addreplacerg -r "@RG\tID:${sample_name}\tSM:${sample_name}" -o {output} {input}
```

Although GATK will run just fine on a BAM with no read groups, exactly zero variants will be output to VCF. In fact, my version of GATK HaplotypeCaller stated that all reads were filtered out by `MappingQualityFilter`.

Then, as usual, it's good to `sort` and `index` the BAM, and mark duplicates.

Running GATK HaplotypeCaller
---

The first step of variant calling is, well, calling variants.

```
gatk HaplotypeCaller \
	--input ${input_bam} \
	--output ${output_VCF} \
	--reference ${reference_genome} \
	--java-options "-Xmx8G"
```



